README.md, before:

# ts-for-gjs

[TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) binding generator for
[GJS](https://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/Gjs) and
[node-gtk](https://github.com/romgrk/node-gtk) (in a very early stage).  Inspired by
[gir2dts](https://github.com/darkoverlordofdata/gir2dts) but re-written and
re-designed to be a more thorough TypeScript description of the [GObject
introspection](https://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/GObjectIntrospection)
interfaces.

The definitions can be used for both TypeScript or JavaScript projects.

## Install

```bash
git clone https://github.com/sammydre/ts-for-gjs
cd ts-for-gjs
npm install
npm link
```

## Usage

After you have linked this project you can use the `ts-for-gir` command in you project:

```bash
$ ts-for-gir --help  
Typescript .d.ts generator from GIR for gjs or node-gtk

VERSION
  ts-for-gir/1.0.0 linux-x64 node-v12.14.1

USAGE
  $ ts-for-gir [COMMAND]

COMMANDS
  generate  Generates .d.ts files from GIR for gjs or node-gtk
  help      display help for ts-for-gir
  list      Lists all available GIR modules
```

### Generate .d.ts files

```bash
$ ts-for-gir generate --help                                                                                                                                                       :(
Generates .d.ts files from GIR for gjs or node-gtk

USAGE
  $ ts-for-gir generate MODULES

ARGUMENTS
  MODULES  [default: *] GIR modules to load, e.g. 'Gio-2.0'. Accepts multiple modules

OPTIONS
  -b, --buildType=lib|types            [default for gjs: lib, default for node: types] Force the definitions generation type
  -e, --environments=gjs|node          [default: gjs,node] javascript environment
  -g, --girDirectories=girDirectories  [default: /usr/share/gir-1.0] GIR directory
  -h, --help                           show CLI help
  -i, --ignore=ignore                  [default: ] modules that should be ignored
  -o, --outdir=outdir                  [default: @types] directory to output to
  -p, --print                          print the output to console and create no files
  -v, --verbose                        Switch on/off the verbose mode
  --configName=configName              name of the config if you want to use a different name
  --ignoreConflicts                    Do not ask for package versions if multiple versions are found
  --pretty                             prettifies the generated .d.ts files

EXAMPLES
  # Run 'ts-for-gir generate' in your gjs or node-gtk project to generate typings for your project, pass the gir modules you need for your project
  ts-for-gir generate

  # You can also use wild cards
  ts-for-gir generate Gtk*

  # If you want to parse all of your locally installed gir modules run
  ts-for-gir generate '*'

  # Generate .d.ts. files only for gjs
  ts-for-gir generate '*' -e gjs

  # Generate .d.ts. files only for node
  ts-for-gir generate '*' -e node

  # Use a special config file
  ts-for-gir generate --configName='.ts-for-gir.gtk4.rc.js

  # Generate .d.ts. files but not for Gtk-3.0 and xrandr-1.3
  ts-for-gir generate --ignore=Gtk-3.0 xrandr-1.3
```

### List available GIR modules

```bash
$ ts-for-gir list --help
Lists all available GIR modules

USAGE
  $ ts-for-gir list MODULES

ARGUMENTS
  MODULES  [default: *] GIR modules to load, e.g. 'Gio-2.0'. Accepts multiple modules

OPTIONS
  -g, --girDirectories=girDirectories  [default: /usr/share/gir-1.0] GIR directory
  -h, --help                           show CLI help
  -i, --ignore=ignore                  [default: true] modules that should be ignored
  -v, --verbose                        Switch on/off the verbose mode
  --configName=configName              name of the config if you want to use a different name

EXAMPLES
  # Lists all available GIR modules in ./vala-girs/gir-1.0
  ts-for-gir list -g ./vala-girs/gir-1.0

  # Lists all available GIR modules in /usr/share/gir-1.0 but not Gtk-3.0 and xrandr-1.3
  ts-for-gir list --ignore=Gtk-3.0 xrandr-1.3
```

### Config

In addition to the option of passing options as a CLI flag, you can also write them in a config file.
To do that, create a new config file called `.ts-for-girrc.js` in your project root directory, like this:

```js
module.exports = {
    pretty: false,
    print: false,
    verbose: true,
    environments: ['gjs', 'node'],
    outdir: '@types',
    girDirectories: '/usr/share/gir-1.0',
    modules: ['*'],
    ignore: [],
    inheritance: true,
}
```

### Inheritance

This fork includes an `inheritance` option. ts-for-gjs' normal mode is to provide class definitions with copies of all methods etc inherited through
the GObject system, because conventional TS class inheritance can't deal with method name clashes/overloads that can occur in GObject bindings. The
`inheritance` option enables a different type of output, taking advantage of an obscure feature of Typescript. Classes are split into an interface and
a constructor with static methods, both having the same name. Interfaces can inherit other interfaces without name clashes causing a problem, and the
constructor can simply not inherit anything, solving the problem for static methods and pseudo-constructors. As we are generating type mappings, not
actual code, these constructors can be used as if they are classes without having to worry about the missing `super` in our representation. The return
type of a constructor is an interface, and this does provide the inheritance information. This results in classes that are easier to use because they
do not need explicit casting, and smaller definition files.

## Examples

Run `npm run regress` or `ts-for-gir --configName='.ts-for-gir.regress.rc.js'` in the root of this project to generate the type definitons for the examples

Now open some code with an editor that understands TypeScript and see what happens, for example
[Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/).

```bash
code examples/gjs/browser
```

## What it's like

![screencast](screencast-01.gif)

## Development

Install GObject Introspection Repository files:

```bash
# Ubuntu 18.04
sudo apt update && sudo apt install \
    libappindicator3-dev \
    libgda-5.0-dev \
    libgirepository1.0-dev \
    libgtk-3-dev \
    libgtksourceview-3.0-dev \
    libnotify-dev \
    libsoup2.4-dev \
    libwebkit2gtk-4.0-dev
```

Generate example type definitions:

```bash
npm run regress
```

### CLI

Run `npm link`, this is similar to `npm -g install ts-for-gir` but links to your local development repository which allows you to test your changes directly.

Now you can execute `ts-for-gir` anywhere on your system:

```bash
ts-for-gir --help
```

### Test

#### Ava

To run our [ava](https://github.com/avajs/ava) tests just run:

```bash
npm run test:ava
```

#### Test gir files

We have a test wich tries to generate the type definition files for all gir files from the [vala-girs](https://github.com/nemequ/vala-girs) repository.

Before you can run this test you need to checkout the vala-girs submodule, to do that run this in the root of ts-for-gjs:

```bash
git submodule update --init
```

Now you can run the test with

```bash
npm run test:girs
```

## Related Projects

### TypeScript Type Definitions

* [gnome-gtk](https://github.com/codejamninja/gnome-gtk) - Typescript bindings for gnome gtk
* [ts-gir](https://github.com/codejamninja/ts-gir) - Typescript bindings for GJS
* [node-gir-typedef](https://github.com/SolarLiner/node-gir-typedef) - TypeScript bindings for node-gir
* [gir2dts](https://github.com/darkoverlordofdata/gir2dts) - The project this is inspired by
* [gir-dts-generator](https://github.com/Place1/gir-dts-generator) - The project that inspired this project
* [gjs-ts](https://github.com/niagr/gjs-ts) - Typescript bindings for GJS

### Other

* [gjs-docs](https://github.com/apla/gjs-docs) - GJS documentation server written using gjs
* [node-gtk](https://github.com/romgrk/node-gtk) - GIO bindings for NodeJS
* [cgjs](https://github.com/cgjs/cgjs) - A NodeJS / CommonJS Runtime for GJS
* [jsgtk](https://github.com/WebReflection/jsgtk) - Replaced by cgjs
* [vala-girs](https://github.com/nemequ/vala-girs) - Collection of GIRs and VAPIs for the Vala toolchain

Commit message:

Use false overloads for method name clashes

README.md, after:

# ts-for-gjs

[TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) binding generator for
[GJS](https://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/Gjs) and
[node-gtk](https://github.com/romgrk/node-gtk) (in a very early stage).  Inspired by
[gir2dts](https://github.com/darkoverlordofdata/gir2dts) but re-written and
re-designed to be a more thorough TypeScript description of the [GObject
introspection](https://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/GObjectIntrospection)
interfaces.

The definitions can be used for both TypeScript or JavaScript projects.

## Install

```bash
git clone https://github.com/sammydre/ts-for-gjs
cd ts-for-gjs
npm install
npm link
```

## Usage

After you have linked this project you can use the `ts-for-gir` command in you project:

```bash
$ ts-for-gir --help  
Typescript .d.ts generator from GIR for gjs or node-gtk

VERSION
  ts-for-gir/1.0.0 linux-x64 node-v12.14.1

USAGE
  $ ts-for-gir [COMMAND]

COMMANDS
  generate  Generates .d.ts files from GIR for gjs or node-gtk
  help      display help for ts-for-gir
  list      Lists all available GIR modules
```

### Generate .d.ts files

```bash
$ ts-for-gir generate --help                                                                                                                                                       :(
Generates .d.ts files from GIR for gjs or node-gtk

USAGE
  $ ts-for-gir generate MODULES

ARGUMENTS
  MODULES  [default: *] GIR modules to load, e.g. 'Gio-2.0'. Accepts multiple modules

OPTIONS
  -b, --buildType=lib|types            [default for gjs: lib, default for node: types] Force the definitions generation type
  -e, --environments=gjs|node          [default: gjs,node] javascript environment
  -g, --girDirectories=girDirectories  [default: /usr/share/gir-1.0] GIR directory
  -h, --help                           show CLI help
  -i, --ignore=ignore                  [default: ] modules that should be ignored
  -o, --outdir=outdir                  [default: @types] directory to output to
  -p, --print                          print the output to console and create no files
  -v, --verbose                        Switch on/off the verbose mode
  --configName=configName              name of the config if you want to use a different name
  --ignoreConflicts                    Do not ask for package versions if multiple versions are found
  --pretty                             prettifies the generated .d.ts files

EXAMPLES
  # Run 'ts-for-gir generate' in your gjs or node-gtk project to generate typings for your project, pass the gir modules you need for your project
  ts-for-gir generate

  # You can also use wild cards
  ts-for-gir generate Gtk*

  # If you want to parse all of your locally installed gir modules run
  ts-for-gir generate '*'

  # Generate .d.ts. files only for gjs
  ts-for-gir generate '*' -e gjs

  # Generate .d.ts. files only for node
  ts-for-gir generate '*' -e node

  # Use a special config file
  ts-for-gir generate --configName='.ts-for-gir.gtk4.rc.js

  # Generate .d.ts. files but not for Gtk-3.0 and xrandr-1.3
  ts-for-gir generate --ignore=Gtk-3.0 xrandr-1.3
```

### List available GIR modules

```bash
$ ts-for-gir list --help
Lists all available GIR modules

USAGE
  $ ts-for-gir list MODULES

ARGUMENTS
  MODULES  [default: *] GIR modules to load, e.g. 'Gio-2.0'. Accepts multiple modules

OPTIONS
  -g, --girDirectories=girDirectories  [default: /usr/share/gir-1.0] GIR directory
  -h, --help                           show CLI help
  -i, --ignore=ignore                  [default: true] modules that should be ignored
  -v, --verbose                        Switch on/off the verbose mode
  --configName=configName              name of the config if you want to use a different name

EXAMPLES
  # Lists all available GIR modules in ./vala-girs/gir-1.0
  ts-for-gir list -g ./vala-girs/gir-1.0

  # Lists all available GIR modules in /usr/share/gir-1.0 but not Gtk-3.0 and xrandr-1.3
  ts-for-gir list --ignore=Gtk-3.0 xrandr-1.3
```

### Config

In addition to the option of passing options as a CLI flag, you can also write them in a config file.
To do that, create a new config file called `.ts-for-girrc.js` in your project root directory, like this:

```js
module.exports = {
    pretty: false,
    print: false,
    verbose: true,
    environments: ['gjs', 'node'],
    outdir: '@types',
    girDirectories: '/usr/share/gir-1.0',
    modules: ['*'],
    ignore: [],
    inheritance: true,
}
```

### Inheritance

This fork includes an `inheritance` option. ts-for-gjs' normal mode is to provide class definitions with copies of all methods etc inherited through
the GObject system, because conventional TS class inheritance can't deal with method name clashes/overloads that can occur in GObject bindings. The
`inheritance` option enables a different type of output, taking advantage of an obscure feature of Typescript. Classes are split into an interface and
a constructor with static methods, both having the same name. The constructor can simply not inherit anything, solving the problem for static methods
and pseudo-constructors. As we are generating type mappings, not actual code, these constructors can be used as if they are classes without having to
worry about the missing `super` in our representation. The return type of a constructor is an interface, and this does provide the inheritance
information.

All this results in classes that are easier to use because they do not need explicit casting, and smaller definition files.

Unfortunately there are some non-static methods in existing GObject-based code that hide different methods with the same name in parent classes.  The
only way this can be handled in Typescript while still using inheritance is to add bogus overloads, but trying to call those overloads will cause
breakage. For example, `Gtk.ToolShell`'s `get_style` method clashes with `Gtk.Widget`'s `get_style`. Therefore you should use them like this:

`Gtk.ToolShell.prototype.get_style.call(widget);
Gtk.Widget.prototype.get_style.call(widget);`

## Examples

Run `npm run regress` or `ts-for-gir --configName='.ts-for-gir.regress.rc.js'` in the root of this project to generate the type definitons for the examples

Now open some code with an editor that understands TypeScript and see what happens, for example
[Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/).

```bash
code examples/gjs/browser
```

## What it's like

![screencast](screencast-01.gif)

## Development

Install GObject Introspection Repository files:

```bash
# Ubuntu 18.04
sudo apt update && sudo apt install \
    libappindicator3-dev \
    libgda-5.0-dev \
    libgirepository1.0-dev \
    libgtk-3-dev \
    libgtksourceview-3.0-dev \
    libnotify-dev \
    libsoup2.4-dev \
    libwebkit2gtk-4.0-dev
```

Generate example type definitions:

```bash
npm run regress
```

### CLI

Run `npm link`, this is similar to `npm -g install ts-for-gir` but links to your local development repository which allows you to test your changes directly.

Now you can execute `ts-for-gir` anywhere on your system:

```bash
ts-for-gir --help
```

### Test

#### Ava

To run our [ava](https://github.com/avajs/ava) tests just run:

```bash
npm run test:ava
```

#### Test gir files

We have a test wich tries to generate the type definition files for all gir files from the [vala-girs](https://github.com/nemequ/vala-girs) repository.

Before you can run this test you need to checkout the vala-girs submodule, to do that run this in the root of ts-for-gjs:

```bash
git submodule update --init
```

Now you can run the test with

```bash
npm run test:girs
```

## Related Projects

### TypeScript Type Definitions

* [gnome-gtk](https://github.com/codejamninja/gnome-gtk) - Typescript bindings for gnome gtk
* [ts-gir](https://github.com/codejamninja/ts-gir) - Typescript bindings for GJS
* [node-gir-typedef](https://github.com/SolarLiner/node-gir-typedef) - TypeScript bindings for node-gir
* [gir2dts](https://github.com/darkoverlordofdata/gir2dts) - The project this is inspired by
* [gir-dts-generator](https://github.com/Place1/gir-dts-generator) - The project that inspired this project
* [gjs-ts](https://github.com/niagr/gjs-ts) - Typescript bindings for GJS

### Other

* [gjs-docs](https://github.com/apla/gjs-docs) - GJS documentation server written using gjs
* [node-gtk](https://github.com/romgrk/node-gtk) - GIO bindings for NodeJS
* [cgjs](https://github.com/cgjs/cgjs) - A NodeJS / CommonJS Runtime for GJS
* [jsgtk](https://github.com/WebReflection/jsgtk) - Replaced by cgjs
* [vala-girs](https://github.com/nemequ/vala-girs) - Collection of GIRs and VAPIs for the Vala toolchain
